
  E-Books – The Bigger Problem, Part One of Three.
  ------------------------------------------------
  Ben Hammersley, January 5, 2010
  
  I think we’re missing a trick here. With 2010 being the Year of the e-Book, 
  (or, at least, the Year of the Please Apple Release The Tablet Please We Beg 
  You), most of the design work that is doing the rounds is around the 
  interface: BERG’s beautiful work for Bonnier is a great example. We know 
  that a device with a colour HD screen, an always-on connection, GPS, sound, 
  video and so on will give magazine designers all sorts of new toys to play 
  with. From a content-designer’s point of view, I couldn’t be more excited.

  From a publishing standpoint, too, e-books are thrilling: the dirty jobs of 
  printing and distribution fall away, replaced with an upload to the iTunes 
  store – or the publisher’s own – and a direct billing relationship with the 
  client. For advertisers it will offer all of the advantages of web 
  advertising with the rich-media and contextual advantages of appearing 
  within a publication, so for a skilled ad-sales team it’s sure thing, and 
  with the Great Media Crisis entering its second decade that sort of talk is 
  catnip to a big media company like Bonnier, or (the one I work for more 
  often) Condé Nast.

  But while BERG’s work, and other pieces like it, are beautiful to see, they 
  leave me very frustrated. The client-side development is very exciting to do 
  – especially the systems-thinking that you need to do to take the entire 
  customer journey from browsing to buying to backing-up – but the harder 
  work, the more fundamental work, isn’t done. I’m talking about the editorial 
  workflow. Bear with me.

  At the moment, the average magazine is made from a combination of Microsoft 
  Word, Photoshop, In-Design, shared-drives, and PDFs sent to the repro house. 
  As each step of the analogue production process has been replaced by a 
  digital version (film photography to digital, for example) that bit has been 
  swapped out and replaced. The upshot is that we have accidentally efficient 
  production processes that are optimised to getting a print magazine out of 
  the door every four weeks or so. When you then try to put that magazine onto 
  the web, as we do with WIRED every month, the process is mostly c
  ut-and-paste. This is one of the reasons why magazine websites aren’t very 
  good: you lose so much simply because of the way you have to get the content 
  from one medium to the other. The rest of the content you never had in the 
  first place (for example because the original copy wasn’t written in HTML, 
  and so doesn’t have links in it.)

  With e-books, and especially with e-book concepts, the stories are published 
  with the implication that the system knows a whole load of stuff that a 
  print magazine doesn’t. The articles are written in hypertext, they have 
  location data and subject cataloging, there is associated video and audio 
  and additional photography, and so on. For a magazine title that is made 
  entirely and exclusively for the e-book format, that’s not a problem. For an 
  existing title trying to make the transition from paper through web to 
  specialised digital device, it’s a show-stopper: the workflow at British 
  Vogue, say, can’t handle it today. Neither could WIRED.

  So a real design challenge for e-books isn’t to design the user experience 
  (which is dependent at the end of the day on the device capabilities anyway, 
  which are pretty much unknown) but rather on designing a system that would 
  allow existing publishers to transition their operations from ramshackle 
  print to All Knowing Digital. We already know much of this: you can take the 
  lessons from blogging CMSs, add in photography handling from places like 
  Photoshelter, combine metadata collection from sources like Google Maps and 
  OpenCalais, and version control from Git, and you’re halfway there. Combine 
  it with process changes, where you require writers to file direct to a 
  system that forces them to add in metadata for example, and you’re closer 
  still. Of course, in two sentences I’ve described a process that really 
  encompasses the whole old-media crisis, but I do think it’s a challenge that 
  can be met. In later posts, I’ll talk about how.


  E-Books – The Bigger Problem, Part Two of Three.
  ------------------------------------------------
  Ben Hammersley, January 5, 2010

  In the first part of this three-parter, I started making suggestions about 
  the internal changes needed to a magazine editorial process to make it ready 
  for ebooks. Here I’ll go further. But first, let me make some starting 
  assumptions.

  1. The ebook (or emagazine, or whatever you want to call it) will not simply 
  consist of a monthly edition of a collection of pages, each made of words 
  and pictures – it will more likely be a rolling collection of pages and 
  services. The traditional monthly magazine cycle being more related to 
  distribution rhythms than anything. Indeed, why do we keep to a regular 
  monthly cycle in print anyway? Why not, say, every three weeks in the 
  winter, every five in the summer? I digress, but.

  2. But for the sake of simplicity we’ll call each logical block of meaning a 
  “story”, whether it is a traditional 4000 word prose piece, a slideshow, a 
  video, a graphic, an interactive something or other, a subject-specific 
  chatbot, or something machine-written, or a combination of all of the above.

  3. That every medium – magazine, newsprint, iPhone, desktop web, tablet, 
  projector, tv, parchment – is uniquely gifted in a particular way. So while 
  the text and the meaning of the “story” might well be the same, the 
  graphical language at least will be different. This means that at some point 
  the art department and the production department for each medium must become 
  separate from the editorial department, and from each other. It’s right here 
  that the tensions occur within an editorial operation: one of the media will 
  get ignored or sidelined for the sake of another. (How many TV shows have 
  websites, compared to how many websites have TV shows, compared to how many 
  website & tv show properties are there? Compare WIRED in print to WIRED 
  online. And so on.)

  4. If you’re going to produce content for more than one medium, therefore, 
  you need to commission content in a strange and abstract way. The story 
  creator’s work for print will be flat text; For an e-book, hypertext; For a 
  web service, hypertext and perhaps an interactive graphic. And more, and so 
  on. This means that the author has to hand in copy that is much much more 
  than a flat text file circa 800 words. It needs to be annotated. It needs to 
  be hyperlinked. It needs to have underlying data. It needs all of this and 
  more to allow the art and production departments of each medium to produce 
  the very best representation they can of the story within their own medium, 
  otherwise their medium will come across as half-arsed. Half-arsed is worse 
  than not doing it at all.

  5. Existing content management systems can’t do this. Existing magazine 
  workflows can’t do this either.

  The perfect case in point is that of metadata. There’s a word you hear a lot 
  on the web. It means the data about the data – the author’s name, the date 
  it was written, and so on. In its purest and perfect sense, any story has an 
  infinite amount of metadata: this piece you’re reading now was written by 
  me, on my macbook air, on the 29th December 2009, in London, in part in 
  Whitehall, in part in the Milk Bar, Soho, and in part in my office in 
  Notting Hill, this paragraph being written with an ambient temperature of 
  about 20 degrees c, while the local weather was cold and rainy, etc etc etc. 
  It concerns electronic publishing, and refers to…and is classified as…and is 
  linked to…and is part of a collection called…and is built on thinking done 
  in…

  You can go on and on.

  The problem is that metadata is incredibly fragile. If you don’t capture it 
  when you can, it is lost forever. The date you wrote that piece? The 
  websites you looked at when you were researching it? The music playing 
  during that photoshoot? You didn’t write it down? Ah, then it’s gone.

  Even more upsettingly, the way that we file our copy today necessitates 
  losing all the metadata we can. Emailed word documents, or plain text files, 
  contain virtually none of the metadata we could use: stuff that we get for 
  free simply by the passage of the creative process itself is instantly 
  thrown away by the workflow. The only times many reporters have to hand in 
  their metadata is when they’re being sued – but even if they were willing, 
  the content management systems don’t have a place for it. This we’ll come 
  back to.

  The necessity above all else of keeping your metadata might seem like a 
  geeky affectation – something that is really only of interest to librarians   
  (itself not a bad reason) or trainspotterish data-completists – but it is in 
  fact the simplest and cheapest route for a publisher to future-proof their 
  business. Your revenue depends on it. Remember, we’re talking about a 
  business sector whose incumbents are trying to transition from having an 
  advantage regarding printing and distribution, to having an advantage 
  regarding content. In other words, Vogue’s printing presses and relationship 
  with COMAG are both lovely, but in a digital world ultimately worthless: 
  it’s the combination of the creative and ad-sales teams upstairs and the 
  rights-owned archive in the basement that gives it value now and in the 
  future. Only one of these things is replicable by others.

  So why do everything you can to keep metadata intact? Because it’s from this 
  information that new products can be automatically created, at a scale and 
  rapidity that would be impossible otherwise. With every piece of metadata 
  that you don’t throw away, you gain a factor more potential ways of slicing 
  through your content and delivering it as a separate product, simply as a 
  result of a database lookup. In the case of Vogue today, say, commissioning 
  an editorial product that simply shows every dress designed by Christian 
  Dior that appears in the archive would involve weeks of intern-work, 
  instantly making it unprofitable or too late. A metadata-complete archive in 
  the future would give you that with a single line of code. As an example, 
  here is a sentence that will be spoken in a newsroom sometime this coming 
  decade:

  “Right then, website people. Fidel is finally dead, so I need a special page 
  with everything we’ve ever written about Castro, plus any travel writing 
  we’ve had from Cuba, and all the pictures we have from the region mapped by 
  place and time, and everything we wrote about JFK and the Bay of Pigs, and I 
  need it online in an hour. Go.”

  The reaction to this request is solely a function of the content management 
  system the newsroom uses. You simply can’t do this in a sane or profitable
  way without an archive with all the metadata preserved. You could do it 
  slowly, sure, with brute force and interns, but who will have those? More to 
  the point, who will have those and still be able to compete in terms of both 
  cost and speed with those that don’t bother with interns and excessive staff 
  in fancy buildings but instead have a workflow designed with the future in 
  mind?

  There is immense potential for new editorial products being created by being 
  able to slice through your existing content in new and interesting ways. 
  Personalisation and location-based services are dependent on this; 
  collaborative filtering works better when you have it; APIs get 
  exponentially richer the more data you have to expose. But without an 
  underlying library of your content complete with metadata, you can’t do any 
  of it very well. If you’re going to rock a multi-outlet, multimedia world, 
  you need to have stories whose parts are way more than their sum. This is 
  new, and in part three, I’ll talk about what this means for journalists, for 
  publishers, and for people designing the systems that use.
  
  E-Books – The Bigger Problem, Part Two Point Five of Three
  ----------------------------------------------------------
  Ben Hammersley, January 30, 2010

  An example, then. One of my basic points is that having lots of metadata 
  means you can do lots of really nice stuff when you transition from print to 
  online, or print to multimedia. But that metadata needs to be captured and 
  stored as close to the original author as you can. The moment when you can 
  write this stuff down and store it is fleeting, and once it has passed, it 
  has passed forever, for profitable values of forever at least.

  One solution is to have your writers mark-up their copy. As an example, 
  here’s the first bit of something I wrote for WIRED last year:

  It’s the hot design company hired by Apple to create its first mouse, (and 
  by Microsoft to create its second), by the Post Office to rework the 
  postbox, by Muji to create its wall-mounted CD player and by Procter & 
  Gamble to reinvent toothpaste tubes. It made the Nokia N-gage, the Palm V 
  and the Head Airflow tennis racquet. Now IDEO is being retained by Barack 
  Obama’s White House to help to reinvigorate the American civil service; by 
  the government of Iceland to help the country to innovate its way out of 
  financial crisis; and by the Kellogg Foundation to reinvent education.

  That sits, now, in a few versions. The webpage linked to above, the print 
  copy (in various states of disarray, all over the world), in a few versions 
  of Word docs on the shared drive at WIRED HQ, on my laptop, and inside 
  Gmail. It lived first as a text file, then a word doc, then an InDesign 
  file, then a PDF, then cut and pasted into a web CMS, then as HTML. Apart 
  from the words, it contains nothing useful whatsoever. (obvious gag insert 
  here)

  Imagine, however, that instead of a Word doc I had submitted a marked-up 
  document in a flavour of XML, like the following. Read through this, even if 
  it looks weird to you. (And for the semantic web people in the audience, 
  it’s pseudocode. Chill.):

  <subject identifier=”Design”/>

  <subject identifier=”Industrial Design”/>

  <subject identifier=”Bill Moggridge”/>

  <subject identifier=”IDEO”/>

  It’s the hot design company hired by <company 
  identifier=”APPL”>Apple</company> to create its first mouse, (and by 
  <company identifier=”MSFT”>Microsoft</company> to create its second), by the 
  <company identifier=”UKPO”>Post Office</company> to rework the postbox, by 
  <company identifier=”MUJI”>Muji</company> to create its wall-mounted CD 
  player and by <company identifier=”PANDG”>Procter & Gamble</company> to 
  reinvent toothpaste tubes. It made the <company 
  identifier=”NOKIA”>Nokia</company> N-gage, the <product 
  identifier=”PALMV”>Palm V</product> and the <product 
  identifier=”HEADAIRFLOW”>Head Airflow</product> tennis racquet. Now <company 
  identifier=”IDEO”>IDEO</company> is being retained by <person 
  identifier=”Barack Obama POTUS”>Barack Obama</person>’s White House to help 
  to reinvigorate the American civil service; by the government of <country 
  identifier=”ICELAND”>Iceland</country> to help the country to innovate its 
  way out of <newsevent identifier=”2008-9FinancialCrisis”>financial 
  crisis</newevent>; and by the <company identifier=”KLLGF”>Kellogg 
  Foundation</company> to reinvent education.

  Now think of all of the stuff in that we can index against. No use at all 
  for the print magazine, but once you come to put it into digital form an 
  archive full of typescripts like this would be so full of options it starts 
  to get giddy. Give me a thoughtfully built mark-up standard and a year’s 
  worth of, say, Vogue, and I’ll break your heart with beauty.

  Now, is this silly? Is it naive to ask writers to submit copy in a marked-up 
  format instead of just typed English? No. People write in marked-up text all 
  the time. Indeed, with blogging, I’d bet that more people write marked-up 
  than not, even without tools to help them. There’s a whole generation used 
  to writing with angle-brackets that wouldn’t blink at the idea that to 
  submit copy you have to submit it in a marked-up format. Tools to 
  pre-validate it could easily be rolled into a publishing workflow too.
  
  E-Books – The Bigger Problem, Part Two Point Five Point One of Three
  --------------------------------------------------------------------
  Ben Hammersley, January 30, 2010

  As I wrote in part 2.5, if you were designing a new generation of content 
  management systems (which you’ll be shocked to hear I am), it would not be 
  unreasonable to ask for journalists to include markup in their typescripts. 
  It seems to me to be the simplest way to get preserve as much data as 
  possible as close to the original sources as possible – something that I’ve 
  described as utterly necessary for a multi-outlet world.

  Having to learn to write in markup isn’t an imposition, any more than having 
  to learn shorthand or telegraphese. And as with learning any new language, 
  you gain a new soul: writing in markup would allow you to embed code.

  The ability to embed code within a story gives us whole new realms of 
  possibilities for journalism and publishing. Digital platforms are connected 
  and location aware, so why not use that? At the moment the answer is 
  “because your infrastructure won’t let you,” but if it could, the potential 
  is extraordinary.

  Pseudocode Example – you could use it to display live data:

  As the temperature in Central London hits <data feed=”London Temp”/>…

  Or location:

  As the temperature in <data feed=”Device Location Town”/> hits…

  Or live forex:

  The hotel’s rooms cost a reasonable 5000 Pesos (<data feed=”UKP/Pesos” 
  amount=”5000″/>)…

  Or:

  The quickest way there is <data feed=”Routing” start=”<DeviceLocation>” 
  end=”Carnegie Hall” />

  Or even putting in logic blocks like this:

  <IF $UKGovernment = “Tory AND Litigious” THEN unpublish;>

  One of the rumours I recent heard about…

  We have heard, during the endless discussions of the death of journalism
  over the past few years, of many new forms of reporting just ready to save 
  us: database journalism, ambient data journalism, sensor-driven-city 
  journalism, interactive infographic journalism. At the same time, if it can 
  be measured chances are there’s a feed for it somewhere online. The world is 
  monitored, live, in millions of internet-addressable ways.

  But today there’s no method to bring the world of live data to the 
  multi-outlet publishing world. By allowing a journalist to embed live data 
  and logic into a piece, however, you give them this whole new palette. Yes, 
  live data doesn’t work in a print product directly, and more thought is 
  needed for a variety of issues (such as archiving), and, yes, journalists 
  will have one more set of skills to learn – but digital platforms require us 
  to stop thinking that submitting a flat 800 words of English prose is 
  enough. For publishers and editors to base their expectations of submitted 
  content on the restrictions of paper seems foolish, and yet they are forced 
  to by their systems. That must change.